README.md, before:

HII POWER DRIVER
---------------

## What does this task do?

This task calculates the (unitless) "influence" of power on the terrestrial surface as one of the key drivers for a combined [Human Influence Index](https://github.com/SpeciesConservationLandscapes/task_hii_weightedsum). "Influence" is a pressure score based on the intensity of electricity usage as measured by "Night Time Lights" datasets. An inter-calibrated nighttime lights dataset with values ranging from 0 - 63 is transformed to a pressure score of 0 - 10 using equal interval quantiles, calculated from the earliest available image (1992). These are:

 ```
 quantiles = {
     "0": {"value": 0, "min": 0, "max": 0},
     "1": {"value": 1, "min": 1, "max": 4},
     "2": {"value": 2, "min": 5, "max": 5},
     "3": {"value": 3, "min": 6, "max": 6},
     "4": {"value": 4, "min": 7, "max": 7},
     "5": {"value": 5, "min": 8, "max": 9},
     "6": {"value": 6, "min": 10, "max": 11},
     "7": {"value": 7, "min": 12, "max": 16},
     "8": {"value": 8, "min": 17, "max": 30},
     "9": {"value": 9, "min": 31, "max": 62},
     "10": {"value": 10, "min": 63, "max": 63},
 ```

### Input Dataset Calibration
The HII power driver (0-10) is calculated from the previous calendar year's calibrated nightlights dataset, which is produced on demand by the task. Two distinct source nightlight datasets are used to calculate this calibrated version following the methods below; these are the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP)/Operational Linescan System (OLS) and the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometry Suite (VIIRS) on the Suomi National Polar-orbiting Partnership Satellite. DMSP provides data from 1992 - 2013 and VIIRS provides data from 2012 through the present.

Inconsistencies within the DMSP time series require implementing intra-calibration within the DMSP dataset. Here the intra-calibrated dataset produced by [Li et al. 2020](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-020-0510-y) is used. Key differences between the DMSP and VIIRS datasets also require inter-calibration of the two datasets. In addition to the calibration process to match VIIRS to DMSP, VIIRS requires substantial noise reduction. These key differences are:

| Description | DMSP | VIIRS | Calibrated |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Date Range | 1992 - 2013 | 2012 - present | 1992 - present |
| Temporal Resolution | Annual | Monthly | Annual |
| Spatial Resolution | 30 arc-second | 15 arc-seconds | 30 arc-second |
| Pixel Value | Digital Number | Radiance | Digital Number |
| Data Range | 0 - 63 | -1.5 - 193564.92 | 0 - 63 |

 The steps to noise removal and calibration steps are as follows:

 1. Annual composites are created using the median value of all pixels for a given year with raw values greater than 0.

 2. General noise (which generally increases with distance from the equator) is removed by creating an image mask using a pixel latitude image. An exponential function is used to stretch the threshold values from a minimum to maximum threshold of 0.1 and 0.75 respectively from 0° to ±60°. The formula for this is:

&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; t = (|lat|<sup>4</sup> / 60<sup>4</sup>) x (t<sub>max</sub> - t<sub>min</sub>) + (t<sub>min</sub>)

&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; Where: <br />
&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; t is the final threshold image <br />
&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; lat is a latitude image <br />
&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; t<sub>min</sub> is the minimum threshold <br />
&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; t<sub>max</sub> is the maximum threshold

3. Regression coeffecients are calculated to convert VIIRS values to DMPS values by comparing pixel values of areas with stable lights through time. These are determined by selecting pixels from the DMSP time series from 2000 - 2012 that have a standard deviation less than 2. A stratified sample of 200 pixel values for each available DMSP value is calculated. The resulting equation to transform VIIRS values to match DMSP is determined to be:

&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; calibrated_viirs = log(viirs) x 10.53 + 24.62

4. Values in the calibrated image greater than 63 are set 63, matching the range of values from DMSP.

5. For the year 2012, in which both DMSP and VIIRS images are available, the final calibrated image is calculated as the mean of DMPS and VIIRS for 2012.

Commit message:

nightlights previous year calc on demand, refactor preprocess methods

README.md, after:

HII POWER DRIVER
---------------

## What does this task do?

This task calculates the (unitless) "influence" of power on the terrestrial surface as one of the key drivers for a combined [Human Influence Index](https://github.com/SpeciesConservationLandscapes/task_hii_weightedsum). "Influence" is a pressure score based on the intensity of electricity usage as measured by "Night Time Lights" datasets. An inter-calibrated nighttime lights dataset with values ranging from 0 - 63 is transformed to a pressure score of 0 - 10 using equal interval quantiles, calculated from the earliest available image (1992) using the `quantile_calc` function in `input_preprocess.py`. These are:

 ```
 quantiles = {
     "0": {"value": 0, "min": 0, "max": 0},
     "1": {"value": 1, "min": 1, "max": 4},
     "2": {"value": 2, "min": 5, "max": 5},
     "3": {"value": 3, "min": 6, "max": 6},
     "4": {"value": 4, "min": 7, "max": 7},
     "5": {"value": 5, "min": 8, "max": 9},
     "6": {"value": 6, "min": 10, "max": 11},
     "7": {"value": 7, "min": 12, "max": 16},
     "8": {"value": 8, "min": 17, "max": 30},
     "9": {"value": 9, "min": 31, "max": 62},
     "10": {"value": 10, "min": 63, "max": 63},
 ```

## Input Dataset Calibration
The HII power driver (0-10) is calculated from the previous calendar year's calibrated nightlights dataset, which is produced on demand by the task. Two distinct source nightlight datasets are used to calculate this calibrated version following the methods below; these are the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP)/Operational Linescan System (OLS) and the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometry Suite (VIIRS) on the Suomi National Polar-orbiting Partnership Satellite. DMSP provides data from 1992 - 2013 and VIIRS provides data from 2012 through the present.

Inconsistencies within the DMSP time series require implementing intra-calibration within the DMSP dataset. Here the intra-calibrated dataset produced by [Li et al. 2020](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-020-0510-y) is used. Key differences between the DMSP and VIIRS datasets also require inter-calibration of the two datasets. In addition to the calibration process to match VIIRS to DMSP, VIIRS requires substantial noise reduction. These key differences are:

| Description | DMSP | VIIRS | Calibrated |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Date Range | 1992 - 2013 | 2012 - present | 1992 - present |
| Temporal Resolution | Annual | Monthly | Annual |
| Spatial Resolution | 30 arc-second | 15 arc-seconds | 30 arc-second |
| Pixel Value | Digital Number | Radiance | Digital Number |
| Data Range | 0 - 63 | -1.5 - 193564.92 | 0 - 63 |

### Noise removal

1. Annual composites are created using the median value of all pixels for a given year with raw values greater than 0.
2. General noise (which generally increases with distance from the equator) is removed by creating an image mask using a pixel latitude image. An exponential function is used to stretch the threshold values from a minimum to maximum threshold of 0.1 and 0.75 respectively from 0° to ±60°. The formula for this is:

&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; t = (|lat|<sup>4</sup> / 60<sup>4</sup>) x (t<sub>max</sub> - t<sub>min</sub>) + (t<sub>min</sub>)

&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; Where: <br />
&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; t is the final threshold image <br />
&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; lat is a latitude image <br />
&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; t<sub>min</sub> is the minimum threshold <br />
&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; &emsp; t<sub>max</sub> is the maximum threshold

### Calibration steps

3. Regression coefficients are calculated to convert VIIRS values to DMSP values by comparing pixel values of areas with stable lights through time. These are determined statically by selecting pixels from the DMSP time series from 2000 - 2012 that have a standard deviation less than 2. A stratified sample of 200 pixel values for each available DMSP value is calculated. See the `stable_light_points` function in `input_preprocess.py`.
4. The resulting equation to transform VIIRS values to match DMSP is determined to be:  
&emsp; &emsp; &emsp; calibrated_viirs = log(viirs) x 10.53 + 24.62
5. Values in the calibrated image greater than 63 are set 63, matching the range of values from DMSP.
6. For the year 2012, in which both DMSP and VIIRS images are available, the final calibrated image is calculated as the mean of DMPS and VIIRS for 2012.

The result and goal is an annual night lights dataset derived from VIIRS that is calibrated to the pre-2013 DMSP values, which is then transformed into the HII power driver by the main task.
